---
layout: post
title: Can you do Quantum Key Distribution without Authenticated Channels?
---

After attending a talk by Psi Vessely on Quantum Key Distribution (in particular
on [BB84](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BB84)), the UCSD
crypto group discussed some of the alleged benefits of QKD.
We mentioned the "standard list":

1. No-cloning theorem provides protection against evesdroppers that "standard"
   crypto cannot achieve [^wiretap]

2. The protocol itself only requires authenticated channels, so can be viewed as
   "key exchange within Minicrypt"

[^wiretap]: It's worth mentioning that QKD is not the only form of key exchange which works
    information-theoretically based on some non-standard assumptions on the
communication channel --- the "Wire-tap channel" assumes that evesdroppers
recieve "noisier" versions of messages than actual participants, and can achieve
similar results. This is usually
studied by coding theorists, but there can be some overlap with cryptography ---
for example, there are lattice-based constructions which rely on a parameter
  (known as the "flatness factor") which looks *suspiciously* like the smoothing
  parameter from lattice cryptography, but I digress.

In our discussion, Adam Suhl pointed out that we don't *strictly* need to be
within Minicrypt, as (using previously-shared randomness) you could use a
[one-time
MAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_authentication_code#One-time_MAC) to
authenticate messages.
This leads to a natural question:

> If you run QKD using a one-time MAC to authenticate communications, can you
> "gain" on the amount of shared random bits you have?

If you could do the above, it gives a construction of information-theoretic
secure cryptography which both *doesn't* assume that you're in minicrypt, and
*doesn't* have a limit on the amount of communication you can do.

# The Heuristic Answer

Even without describing the BB84 protocol, it should be clear that the answer
depends on the (classical) round complexity of the protocol.
In particular, all classical communication must be MAC'd, and therefore expends
[^one-time-mac]
some constant amount of the key material both parties have.
This means that a protocol which is $$O(f(n))$$ classical rounds must *also*
have $$O(f(n))$$ bits of preshared randomness to execute, where $$n$$ is the
amount of *quantum* bits communicated.

Provided the algorithm can agree on $$\omega(f(n))$$ random bits, we would
therefore have a strict "gain" in the number of shared bits upon a single
execution of the protocol.
We could then "bootstrap" this procedure to get an arbitrary number of
pre-shared bits, which we can use with things like the one-time pad to discard
*all* computational assumptions!

[^one-time-mac]: This is because one-time MACs are information-theoretically
    secure provided that you don't reuse the keys, similarly to the one-time
    pad.

# The Actual Answer

At this point, I would normally do some computations.
For better or worse, while searching for the round complexity of parts [^info-reco] of the BB84 protocol, I found [this
paper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/264.pdf).
Section 4 in particular describes a relatively simple protocol which seems to
achieve "OTP-like" encryption by using QKD with one-time MACs to generate enough
key material. Note that I haven't read the full paper (and do not work in this
area), but the plausible idea we had seems to have been fleshed out by this
paper, and they claim it works.

[^info-reco]: In particular of the "information reconciliation" step --- all other steps seem to
    be obviously a constant number of rounds to me.

# Issues with full QKD without Minicrypt

The aforementioned scheme *seems* to provide a construction that allows you to
exchange enough key material to do the one-time pad on arbitrarily large
messages with *no* computational assumptions.
This is what I was hoping for, and we found it!

Unfortunately, there's the following *dumb* attack an evesdropper can always do
to thwart this plan --- measure every quantum message!
This measurement can lead to the key exchange protocol failing, and a
reduction in the jointly shared randomness of Alice and Bob, which will
eventually force them to fallback on using techniques that do not deplete their
jointly shared randomness (such as computationally secure MACs to authenticate
the channel).

So the answer to "Can you do QKD without Authenticated Channels"? seems to be *yes, but
no*.
Still, the possibility of "bootstrapping" QKD is something I haven't seen in
casual discussions of it, and was quite interesting to learn about.


